Artificial intelligence at Social Security | SSA
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know
Here's how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
A locked padlock
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Social Security
English
Español
Sign in
Account
Menu
Benefits
By Phase
Prepare
Apply
Manage benefits
By Type
Retirement
Disability
Survivor
Family
Supplemental Security Income (SSI)
Benefits overview
Medicare
Plan for Medicare
Sign up for Medicare
Request to lower IRMAA
Apply for Part D Extra Help
Manage Medicare benefits
Card & record
Number & card
Personal record
Search
English
Español
Sign in
My account
Account home
Sign out
Breadcrumb
Home
Artificial intelligence at Social Security
Artificial intelligence at Social Security
Artificial intelligence (AI) holds the potential to drive economic growth in the United States and improve the quality of life for all Americans. In line with
Executive Order 13960
'Promoting the Use of Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence in the Federal Government,’
Executive Order 14179
'Removing Barriers to American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence,' and
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Memorandum M-25-21 (PDF)
'Accelerating Federal Use of AI through Innovation, Governance, and Public Trust,' the Social Security Administration is committed to transparency in AI governance and innovation.
This page serves as a resource for information on the Social Security Administration's AI-related reports and use cases.
Social Security's enterprise AI strategy
AI is changing how federal agencies serve the public, improve efficiency, and achieve their missions. In line with OMB Memorandum M-25-21, this strategy guides our responsible adoption and governance of AI across the agency. We are committed to removing barriers to AI innovation, making the most of our investments, and ensuring our use of AI is transparent, secure, and accountable. By promoting responsible AI use, we aim to improve public services, protect privacy and civil rights, and build an AI-ready workforce. This strategy demonstrates our commitment to responsible AI innovation and to continually improving our service to the American people.
Read Social Security's Enterprise Artificial Intelligence Strategy (PDF)
AI compliance plan
In accordance with OMB M-25-21, each agency must post publicly on the agency’s website either a plan to achieve consistency with M-25-21 or a written determination that the agency does not use and does not anticipate using covered AI.
Read Social Security's M-25-21 Compliance Plan (PDF)
AI inventory
Social Security maintains an inventory of AI use cases including current and planned uses, consistent with the agency's mission. The link below summarizes those AI use cases (updated as of April 2026).
Download the Social Security Public Artificial Intelligence Listing File (CSV)
Return to top
Support
Contact us
Find an office
Forms
Publications
Report fraud
Languages
Español
Other languages
Plain language
Services for
Employers & businesses
Government agencies
Other groups
Representatives
Resources
Careers
Chief actuary data
Communications
Financial reports
Initiatives
Research & policy
Social Security Administration
SSA.gov
An official website of the
Social Security Administration
Secondary Footer
About SSA
Civil rights and compliance
Privacy policy
Office of the Inspector General
Accessibility statement
FOIA requests
Performance reports
Looking for U.S. government information and services?
Visit USA.gov