Department of Justice | AI Inventory
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here's how you know
Here's how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Utilities
Our Offices
Find Help
Contact Us
Search
Menu
Close
About
About
The Attorney General
Organizational Chart
Budget & Performance
History
Privacy Program
Our Work
News
News
Press Releases
Speeches
Videos
Photo Galleries
Blogs
Podcasts
Resources
Resources
Guidance Documents
Forms
Publications
Information for Victims in Large Cases
Justice Manual
Business and Contracts
Grants
Employment
Employment
Why Justice ?
Benefits
DOJ Vacancies
Legal Careers at DOJ
Our Offices
Find Help
Contact Us
Search
Breadcrumb
Justice.gov
Artificial Intelligence
AI Inventory
AI Inventory
Share
Facebook
X
LinkedIn
Email
Introduction
Executive Order (EO) 13960
,
Promoting the Use of Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence in the Federal Government
(Dec. 3, 2020); and
OMB Memorandum M-25-21
,
Accelerating Federal Use of AI through Innovation, Governance, and Public Trust
(Apr. 3, 2025) (M-25-21) required federal agencies to report on their use of AI by conducting an annual inventory of their AI use cases. Each federal agency must: (1) inventory its AI use cases; (2) submit an agency inventory to Office of Management and Budget (OMB); and (3) post the publicly releasable AI uses on the agency’s website. The spreadsheet reflects the consolidated 2025 AI Use Case Inventory for the Department of Justice (DOJ).
Purpose and Result
The 2025 AI Use Case Inventory is a repository of DOJ’s AI uses. All of the Department’s components contribute to this effort. The inventory supports U.S. Government (USG) AI initiatives, while also furthering DOJ’s AI goals to advance governance, accelerate innovation, and ensure public trust. The 2025 AI Use Case Inventory includes AI use cases in all stages of development, including pre-deployment, pilot, deployed, or retired. The inventory facilitates collaboration and unifies efforts by providing DOJ components with a common understanding of how AI is being used across DOJ, which expedites use and decreases overall costs to DOJ and the entire USG.
The 2025 AI Use Case Inventory includes 315 entries, a 30.7% increase from the 2024 inventory. This reflects increasing collaboration among and within components to accelerate AI adoption and innovation.
Methodology
The rapidly evolving AI landscape has resulted in updates to DOJ’s AI inventory process. Given the strategic importance of AI, DOJ has taken a rigorous approach to data collection to ensure we can provide an unprecedented level of quality, comprehensiveness, and transparency. This work is ongoing and integrated into DOJ’s AI governance process.
To ensure accuracy, technical and non-technical leaders across DOJ, including component heads, were involved in preparing this inventory. Component representatives from DOJ’s Emerging Technology Board (ETB) and AI governance working groups collaborated with the DOJ Chief AI Officer to review and consolidate component submissions and finalize this full DOJ inventory.
Notes about the 2025 AI Use Case Inventory:
Consolidated Use Cases:
To ensure consistent reporting, DOJ combined similar widely-adopted AI use cases into single DOJ-wide AI use case entries. This reflects ongoing maturation of AI and demonstrates components’ greater coordination to reduce duplicative efforts.
Use Case ID Updates:
Aggregation of widely-adopted AI use cases into a single DOJ-wide entry, removal of duplicative or mislabeled entries, and combining commercial entries following vendor mergers or acquisitions resulted in non-sequential Use Case ID numbering and in the omission of individual listing of some previously listed entries.
Release Protocol:
Some information was withheld due to recognized information sharing restrictions in compliance with existing laws, policies, and regulations. DOJ has followed the FOIA standard in assessing information for release and has erred toward partial release rather than full withholding.
AI Landscape Evolution:
DOJ is committed to fostering public trust through a comprehensive public release of our AI inventory. Standard responses were utilized when guidance is evolving to best reflect DOJ’s approach to the public. The following link provides publicly-released Privacy Impact Assessment associated with AI use cases:
https://www.justice.gov/opcl/doj-privacy-impact-assessments
.
Download the AI Inventory File
Updated January 30, 2026
U.S. Department of Justice
950 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington DC 20530
Contact the Department
Phone: 202-514-2000
TTY: 711
|
TRS Info
Signup for Email Updates
Social Media
twitter
facebook
youtube
instagram
linkedin
About
Budget & Performance
Archives
FOIA
Accessibility
Legal Policies & Disclaimers
Privacy
For Employees
Office of the Inspector General
No FEAR Act Data
EEO Policy Statement
Vulnerability Disclosure
Multilingual
Vote.gov
Have a question about Government Services?
Contact USA.gov
Top